Kenchiku taiso: Posing with a passion for architecture

Koji Ito / Yomiuri Shimbun Photographer

Tokyo Tower. Click. Tokyo Big Sight. Click. As pictures of famous architectural landmarks are projected onto a big screen one after another, groups of participants contort their bodies trying to depict the shapes.

It's called "kenchiku taiso," or architectural gymnastics, in which participants try to physically depict architecture based on the first impression they get of the structures, such as their outer forms, structural design and purpose.

Isamu Yoneyama, 46, a researcher at Edo-Tokyo Museum in Sumida Ward, Tokyo, came up with the exercise, hoping that "children will become familiar with architecture through the gymnastics."

According to the architectural gymnastics website (http://kenchiku-taiso.com/), people who practice kenchiku taiso need not only physical capability, but also a passion for architecture as well as observation skills and knowledge about the structures.

Yoneyama, an expert in the history of architecture, performed kenchiku taiso for the first time about 10 years ago at a Tokyo architectural exhibition together with Hidehisa Takahashi, 41, curator of Edo-Tokyo Open Air Architectural Museum in Koganei, western Tokyo.

Last year, writer Motoko Tanaka and editor Masaki Onishi joined the two scholars to give a demonstration of kenchiku taiso to be featured in a book. The book sparked a kenchiku taiso boom, giving readers a chance to "learn about architecture in a way that is entertaining and funny."

Last month, about 50 people participated in a kenchiku taiso event in Chofu, western Tokyo. Pictures of various structures such as the newly opened Tokyo Gate Bridge and Tsukiji Honganji temple were shown on a big screen. Participants tried to "express" the answer to those "difficult questions" with every possible posture they could come up with. Some laid down while others climbed on top of them.

"Elderly people can casually join in, too, making the event a way for different generations to interact with each other," Yoneyama said.

Nine-year-old participant Minori Ishikawa said: "I not only enjoyed it, but I learned a lot. I want to try expressing one of my school's buildings next time."

The kenchiku taiso website has videos demonstrating the architectural gymnastics, and posts event information. The exercise is also featured on a DVD.