THROUGH OTAKU EYES / Otaku shopping complexes may save local cities

Makoto Fukuda / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Since February, I've been working at the Yomiuri Shimbun branch office in Utsunomiya, about 100 kilometers north of Tokyo. It's sad that I can't visit my "second home" in Akihabara, Tokyo, as much as I used to, but there's a building that could be considered a mini-Akihabara here in Utsunomiya.

Festa, a commercial building located in Utsunomiya's main shopping district, is known as an "otaku building" that sells anime, game and cosplay goods.

On March 17, nationwide otaku goods recycling chain Lashinbang opened a store in Festa. At the end of March, a cosplay photo studio opened, and otaku-related shops steadily overtook the complex. Fourteen of the 18 shops are otaku-related.

Originally, Festa opened in 2001 as an ordinary shopping complex for youth fashion and sold clothes and accessories. Since then, existing otaku stores such as Animate and game shop Yellow Submarine have enjoyed brisk sales. When many other tenants closed shop, nationwide otaku shops such as Mandarake and Melonbooks replaced them.

A spokesperson of Festa's parent company said, "After a while, we intentionally went for an 'otaku line.'"

The manager of Lashinbang's Utsunomiya store said the shop decided to open a branch there as they were invited to take over a vacant space by Festa's management company.

Customers at otaku stores tend to know what they want and visit similar stores. As a result, it's beneficial and efficient to lure customers if otaku-related shops are located close together. It's a win-win for both stores and shoppers.

For instance, on Lashinbang's opening day, many people first visited the store before stopping by at other stores within the complex.

Lashinbang buys and sells used anime goods, CDs, DVDs and dojinshi fan-made manga. Since its main store opened in 2000 in Ikebukuro, Tokyo, it has opened 20 branches nationwide, including one in Utsunomiya.

At the Utsunomiya shop, more than 100,000 items are displayed on the 150-square-meter store's shelves. Right after the store opened, long lines formed in front of the cashiers.

A 28-year-old man came all the way from Kawaguchi, Saitama Prefecture, even though he lives closer to Tokyo than Utsunomiya.

"I bought about 20 anime CDs and DVDs. This store has a good stock of books and goods," he said.

Shopping complexes housing otaku shops like Festa can be found in other regional cities as well. It's a comfortable and cozy place for otaku like me.

But from a commercial aspect, focusing on a type of product and customer, especially young people, is a good business strategy for such cities, which now face hollowing-out in town shopping districts and depopulation.

===

Fukuda is a Yomiuri Shimbun staff writer at the Utsunomiya branch office and a former Cultural Department writer specializing in anime and manga.