Like father, like son / Teruyuki Kagawa, son to honor family's kabuki legacy

Junichiro Shiozaki / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

A hot topic this theater season is the upcoming kabuki debut of Teruyuki Kagawa, 46, a popular stage actor and son of acclaimed kabuki actor Ichikawa Ennosuke III. Kagawa will debut in June and July with his 8-year-old son to follow in his father's footsteps.

Kagawa and his son Masaaki will be featured at the June and July Okabuki events at the Shinbashi Enbujyo theater in Tokyo's Higashi-Ginza district.

The events will primarily be held in commemoration of Ichikawa Kamejiro II, Kagawa's cousin, to inherit the name Ennosuke IV.

The events will feature traditional pieces and the spectacular Yamato Takeru associated with Ennosuke III, as well as the "kojo," a ceremony typically held during name-succession performances.

Although a novice in the kabuki world, Kagawa has already garnered critical acclaim for his skillful acting in films and TV dramas.

Kagawa is the eldest son of Ennosuke III, 72, a talented kabuki actor known for creating the Super Kabuki series, and actress Yuko Hama, 76. After his parents divorced, he was raised by his mother's family. Although he had no contact with his father for many years, they have gotten closer recently.

Ennosuke III's Super Kabuki, including Yamato Takeru, received high praise for its various innovative features, such as exciting acrobatic stunts.

The 400-year-old traditional theater style places much value on passing performing styles and skills from father to son.

Kagawa said: "I wondered if it's right for two generations of a kabuki family with a long tradition--I myself, the eldest son of the head of a kabuki family, and my eldest son Masaaki--to live away from kabuki. I was concerned about the future of the Omodaka-ya [the Ennosuke family's stage name] blood."

Kagawa said he was "relieved to learn that Kamejiro would carry on the Ennosuke name and the family's performing style."

He had also "been worried [about what he should do] since Masaaki was born."

Kagawa said: "I didn't want to just wait passively [until Ennosuke III invited Masaaki to partake in the kabuki world]. I'd rather choose to voluntarily get involved in the kabuki world to continue the Omodaka-ya tradition with Kamejiro-san. I didn't want to regret it later."

During the two months of performances, the current Ennosuke III will also inherit the En-o name to become En-o II. Kagawa will become Ichikawa Chusha IX and Masaaki will become Ichikawa Danko V.

For the June event, Kagawa will perform the leading role in Ogurusu no Chobe-e, which tells the story of a farmer who is said to have killed feudal warlord Akechi Mitsuhide. He will also perform in Yamato Takeru.

In July, Kagawa will perform with Ichikawa Danjuro, the head of the prestigious Danjuro family, and his popular son, Ebizo, in Shogun Edo o Saru, a story depicting the last shogun of the Edo period (1603-1867).

Kagawa said he should be ready to perform on the same stage with Danjuro.

"What will I think [when performing with Danjuro]? I'm anxious as I know it's not an easy business," he said. "I realize my performance may not be well received and my wish [to participate in the kabuki world] may not be understood." He added, saying, "I don't mind becoming a stepping stone for my son to inherit the Omodaka-ya legacy."

A mischievous Masaaki was excited during a photo session.

He said that his schoolmates cheered him on after hearing about his upcoming debut as a kabuki actor late last year.

"I'm now practicing for 'kojo.' It's hard for me to sit on my knees for a long time," he said.

"I don't like to watch DVDs of kabuki performances, but I like to see live kabuki. It's much more real," he added with a smile. "When my father and mother take me to see kabuki, they explain each scene to me."

To make his father's dream come true, he began studying traditional Japanese dance, an essential art for kabuki actors, when he was very young. After his debut performance, he will start taking music lessons to become a better kabuki actor.

===

Respect to predecessors

Although he was born to a merchant family, Ichikawa Chusha VII (1860-1936) was elevated to a high rank among kabuki performers.

In his later years, he was admired for his expertise and trained many good performers. His thoughts on kabuki were compiled and published in 1943.

Ichikawa Chusha VIII (1896-1971) was lauded for his performing skills and is still remembered by kabuki enthusiasts.

"I read Chusha VII's book and thought we shared many of the same ideas about theater, which I had derived from performing in films," Kagawa said. "If [the shared ideas] are due to the Omodaka-ya blood that runs through Kamejiro-san's veins, it runs through me, too, and it's my destiny.

"When I visit my family grave, I feel the responsibility I have for my familial duty more and more clearly. Meanwhile, I'm aware I can never catch up with my two predecessors, who had a vast amount of expertise. So I've been overwhelmed with the thought that I'm doing something very bold. I have mixed feelings," Kagawa said.

Toward the end of his book, Chusha VII wrote, "Don't forget that the acting profession requires lifelong training," and "Without understanding it, you can't be a mature actor."

Kagawa and his son's challenges have just begun. A long, ragged path lies ahead of them.