Stage set for ghosts and laughter

The Yomiuri Shimbun

Comprising some familiar faces posing as Japan's literary legends, film Ghostwriter Hotel tells the story of an aspiring writer and his encounter with the ghosts of the deceased authors.

In a recent interview with The Yomiuri Shimbun, actor Tsuyoshi Abe recalled the atmosphere on the set of director Hiroaki Ito's bizarre comedy. Many of the cast are from Yoshimoto Kogyo Co., a major comedic company.

"During the shoot, I had to try so hard to stop laughing out loud," he said.

Abe plays aspiring novelist Utsumi who stays at a hotel to write a book. When he arrives there, he finds unfinished manuscripts by famous novelists who once stayed at the hotel. He uses tips from their notes and completes his own stories with the help of the writers' ghosts.

Although the comedians, including Sekai no Nabeatsu and Kendo Kobayashi, appear as the literary legends, it's difficult to distinguish whether they are actually getting into the roles or simply being their usual comedic selves.

"I would say 30 percent to 50 percent of their performance in this film was improvised," Abe said. "At every moment, it depended on whether I could perform in a way that matched their acting. When it was impossible to act, I just couldn't do anything but burst out laughing."

Abe said this time he focused on "receptive acting," meaning he followed the lead of other actors rather than developing preconceived ideas about how he would act in each scene.

"Because almost all actors around me were comedians, I realized the most important thing for me was to act normally in an understated performance. I think the film is enjoyable, with the scenes balanced between comedy and drama," the actor said.

Abe was born in China's Heilongjiang Province to a Chinese father and a mother who had Chinese and Japanese parents. He moved to Japan when he was 9 years old. After finishing high school, he went to Beijing to study acting. Based in Japan, Abe also appears in various Chinese and Taiwan works.

"There are more opportunities for Japanese actors to feature in Chinese movies as well as for Chinese performers to be cast in Japanese ones. Wouldn't it be wonderful if there were more opportunities like this, and we got to know each other better without politics interfering?" he said.

"Ghostwriter Hotel," in Japanese, is now playing.