The height of 'receptive acting'

Shoji Ichihara / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Kei Tanaka

If you call Kei Tanaka "just another pretty face," you'll probably be scolded by those around him. His personality, expressions, acting ability--everything about him--has an air of complexity. Tanaka, who just by standing silently makes you think, "There's something hidden there," stars in the now-playing theater performance, Gencho (The imaginary butterfly). On a rehearsal day, he spoke to The Yomiuri Shimbun about his passion for acting.

Tanaka does not like scripts that bring the "I" to the fore, and his technique is based on "receptive acting," which involves scrutinizing and responding to costars' acting.

"I don't decide, 'This role has to be played like this,'" Tanaka says. "Everything depends on the other person's performance, and that can vary widely. Maybe these variations are what make it fun."

I watched the rehearsal of a scene in Gencho that lends credence to what Tanaka says. In it, butterfly maniac Totsuka (Masaaki Uchino) tries to physically attack the young recluse, Shinichi (Tanaka).

Totsuka: No one will come if you cry out for help!

Shinichi: ...

But such scenes involving aggressor and victim are not unique to this particular scene, nor to this particular play.

"I somehow believe it'd be interesting to put a receptive actor like me in a leading role," Tanaka says. Being receptive is one thing, but the speed of Tanaka's reactions is something else. His ability to deftly discern his costars' lines, actions and emotions lends an incredible precision to his performances.

Uchino praised Tanaka's skills at a press conference for Gencho, saying, "He's extremely bright and can grasp what the director wants instantaneously."

The 27-year-old Tokyo native is certainly a clever actor. When describing himself, Tanaka says nonchalantly: "I've never had a problem remembering my lines, no matter how long they are. I can quickly grasp what [directors or costars] want out of me, which is sometimes not all that pleasant."

===

A scattered inferiority complex

So, is Tanaka just a cocky, unpleasant character? No, not at all.

"I don't have just one big 'lump' of a complex, I've got lots of them, scattered all over the place," he insists.

First, there's his appearance. But aren't people always calling him handsome?

"If plastic surgery was widely accepted in Japan, I'd get some work done on my face right away...My looks are kind of half-baked--not handsome, not ugly," Tanaka says.

Second, his career. "It's already been 12 years since I made my debut, and I have thought of myself as being on the bottom of the heap [in the acting trade]. Honestly, there've been times when I had almost no work," Tanaka says.

The complexes seem not to end there, but Tanaka's passion changes the minuses to pluses. "Being at the bottom of the heap means I've been all over the place. So, I've had a wider range of experiences than some other people," he says.

Tanaka spent a long time piling up experience with small roles, but inside he was always waiting for the chance to play the lead--not out of a desire to be noticed, but from a powerful love of the stage. "With the big roles, you get to spend more time on stage," Tanaka says. "I love being under the lights, so it's always been my dream to land a big role."

Tanaka first caught people's attention in the 2003 TV drama Water Boys. Other TV roles, as well as parts in movies, plays and commercials followed. After playing the heroine's older brother in the 2011 NHK morning series Ohisama (the Sun) and a detective on the 2012 NTV network drama Deka Kurokawa Suzuki (Detective Kurokawa Suzuki), Tanaka is now much in demand.

Fans of the stage likely know him from Uragiri no Machi (Street of betrayal) directed by Daisuke Miura and Geinin Kokan Nikki (Actors' diary exchange) by Osamu Suzuki.

===

Unaware of audience

Since he must ply his trade before a live audience, Tanaka devotes countless hours to rehearsal, deeply in love with a stage that allows no fakery.

This love, however, has some unique qualities. Gencho director Akira Shirai once asked Tanaka, "Why do you talk with your back [to the audience]?"

In fact, Tanaka says he is not keen on acting while facing the audience. "For me, ideal acting is when the actor doesn't realize the audience is there," he says. Seeing actors that are overly conscious of the audience "makes it look like an 'act.' Right away that cools things off."

On the other hand, when Tanaka is wholeheartedly absorbed in a role, his acting is tremendous.

"If I'm able to completely submerge myself, everything falls away--my body, my lines, the play," he says.

Lurking beneath a soft exterior lies a talent capable of demonstrating extreme focus. There have been a few times where "the play is ending, but it feels like it just began," Tanaka says. At such times, he feels a deep satisfaction: "What? It's already over? I feel like I've got another performance in me."

Will Tanaka's performance this time around leave the audience similarly satisfied?
