LOOKING EAST / Nakano Broadway: Next generation otaku mecca

Takamasa Sakurai / Special to the Daily Yomiuri

A five-minute train ride from hectic Shinjuku is Nakano Station. The area may not be as well known overseas as Akihabara and Harajuku, but it is actually one of Tokyo's must-see Japanese pop culture hubs.

At the edge of an arcade stretching from the station's north exit lies a 10-story multi-tenant building called Nakano Broadway, an otaku mecca where anime, idol and game shops vie for space in a location that is always crowded.

The building opened in 1966 with commercial establishments up to the fourth floor and residences above. Unlike typical commercial-living complexes in Tokyo, the space allocation per shop in Nakano Broadway is particularly small.

Apparently due to limited space, each shop sells a specialized selection of goods--figures, card games, cosplay accessories, idol goods, antique toys and manga, dojinshi fan-made manga and occult books.

Voice actor Sumire Uesaka, 20, has been a frequent visitor to Nakano Broadway since she was in middle school. She made her debut with the TV anime program Papa no Yukoto o Kikinasai (Listen to your dad) while studying at Sophia University and majoring in Russian. She drops by Nakano on the way home from school, she said.

"I always come to Nakano Broadway whenever I have a job around this area. I usually hang around for five hours or so," she said.

"I was interested in the world of subculture and surfed the Internet to discover Nakano Broadway. I was amazed to find out that there's a building housing various subculture shops," she said. "I went there for the first time on my day off from school. Everything I saw was unique and unbelievable. I was scared of being unable to resist buying endlessly once I started shopping, so I decided to stick to window-shopping that day."

The way she discovered Nakano Broadway on the Internet is similar to how people overseas become acquainted with Japanese pop culture.

Young people overseas search for information every day by typing keywords such as anime, manga, kawaii, Tokyo, fashion and Harajuku. In doing so, they come upon websites with information on Lolita fashion, dojinshi, fashion brands and the way to find them.

Foreign youth who grew up with anime have much in common with young Japanese people when it comes to pop culture. Both groups search the Internet for information on their interests, which are often similar. If two people with shared interests can directly communicate, they initiate a type of cultural exchange, which promotes more global exchange in general.

"I come to Nakano alone most of the time, but I always feel as if I werd with friends," she said.

There are not many places in the world where people can share common interests and feel such a sense of belonging.

"I usually don't ask questions in the stores, but I find that the shop staff in Nakano are very receptive. I sometimes feel like I'm at a library," she said.

Listening to her story, I got the feeling that Akihabara and Nakano are like opposite sides of the same coin. They look different at first glance but have something in common beyond manga and anime, or surface appearances; they are actually the same coin.

"Nakano Broadway is like a mixed bag that represents modern Japan. I want foreigners to visit Nakano after going to Akihabara," said Uesaka, who is a longtime Lolita fan, but also loves anime and manga.

There's really no difference between Nakano and Harajuku or Akihabara. For the young generation of fans like Uesaka, the wall separating Nakano from those otaku meccas is fading away.

It will be interesting to see how the current generation of Nakano enthusiasts communicates with foreigners.

Follow Takamasa Sakurai at http://twitter.com/sakuraitakamasa

Sakurai is a content producer who uses events and seminars to engage in "pop culture diplomacy."