Housework services lend a helping hand

Taku Iwaki / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

When a company employee first visited the website run by homemaker service Bears Co. to calculate the worth of the domestic chores she performed every month, she was shocked to find she could be earning almost 290,000 yen.

The 37-year-old woman, a resident of Meguro Ward, Tokyo, who also looks after her toddler son, learned that her domestic duties amounted to 287,791 yen.

"Am I doing too much? Maybe I can ask someone else to help with some of the chores," said the woman, bemoaning she was always too tired to tackle such tasks on weekends.

No longer just the stuff of TV dramas, homemaker services are gaining popularity and business is booming as they meet the needs of not only double-income households, but also time-pressed single households and elderly people by providing various plans.

Bears is based in Chuo Ward, Tokyo, but if customers prefer a face-to-face consultation instead of speaking with a company representative over the phone, they can visit the firm's Jiyugaoka branch. The company is the first to offer such a service.

Bears' deluxe course, to which 70 percent of its customers sign up, costs about 34,000 yen a month as part of a yearly contract. Helpers' transportation costs are included in the price.

Helpers do two hours of chores at their clients' homes once a week and can even come when the client is absent.

Clients first discuss a list of chores--pick up the kids, make dinner before the parents come home and so on--with a Bears employee at their homes. Helpers are women aged between 20 and 60.

Also in Chuo Ward, Kajitaku Co. sells coupons for 14 tasks--cleaning the kitchen, bathroom and air conditioner, among others--and services are capped at 12,600 yen. The coupons, available at stores including Bic Camera or Aeon stores, are also a popular gift.

Duskin Co., meanwhile, has a reputation for performing the most thorough cleaning such as ridding moisture from household plumbing. However, the company has received many requests for standard tasks such as cleaning single room apartments and drying clients' futons in the sun.

Minimaid Service Co. based in Shibuya Ward, Tokyo, also offers house cleaning assistance. Its standard service costs 11,655 yen for 2-1/2 hours. Some clients spend more than 150,000 yen a month, the firm said.

Keio Corp. offers similar services for residents who live along its railway lines. It recently expanded its services, and staff can accompany clients while they shop or do housework in their absence.

Nichii Gakuin Co. is known for sending certified helpers to help with at-home care, but it also offers services not covered by nursing insurance, such as providing conversation partners or cooking meals for clients' families. The firm is sometimes asked to help bathe elderly people at inns when they are traveling.

Security company Secom Co. charges 3,570 yen for 30 minutes of cleaning services a month. Although the number of services offered and local availability is limited, the firm often gets requests from people living away from home who want the company to check on their parents while doing the housework.

===

Growth, but at a price

According to Kana Takeda of Nomura Research Institute Ltd., the homemaker market is expected to grow sixfold to 172 billion yen, although this figure accounts only for demand among women.

At the same time, the National Consumer Affairs Center of Japan has received an increasing number of complaints, such as agencies failing to meet clients' expectations.

Lifestyle critic Sachiko Oki, who runs the house cleaning business Frau Grupe Co., advises customers to exercise caution when choosing an agency.

"Customer numbers and satisfaction rates are a good indication when deciding on an agency. Also, find a reputable agency that provides detailed explanations," Oki said.