Parties help workers get to know boss, coworkers

The Yomiuri Shimbun

Every Friday night, the staff cafeteria of GMO Internet Inc. transforms into a bar where its employees can gather after work and drink beer, wine and cocktails for free.

The Internet services company opened its headquarters in Shibuya Ward, Tokyo, in July, providing free meals to its staff. On Fridays, from 6:30 p.m. to 10:30 p.m., it offers free drinks.

"The company aims to make this bar a relaxing place where employees can drink with their colleagues and bosses," said Harumi Ishii, a spokeswoman of GMO.

Employees get their drinks at a counter and clean up before leaving.

Tomoko Hamabuchi, 24, comes to the bar almost every week.

"I'm very busy during the day and only talk about business matters with my bosses," says Hamabuchi, who is in charge of online advertising. "But at a drinking session, I get a chance to ask my bosses about my future, among other things. I also can get to know my coworkers better, which makes it easier to work with them."

GMO may be unique in providing a drinking space at the workplace, but many companies hold drinking sessions outside the office at the end of March and in early April in Japan.

At the turn of the fiscal year, many workers experience personnel changes and new recruits are assigned to various departments. The tradition of attending welcome and farewell parties provides a good opportunity to get to know coworkers and management. In that sense, communication skills on such occasions is a plus.

"Company-organized parties are rare opportunities to interact with coworkers in a way that transcends generation gaps," says Toshie Igaki, president of Tokyo-based Cherie Roses Ltd., which specializes in worker training.

Many people tend to spend their after-work hours with colleagues of the same generation. At office parties, it is easier to talk to the boss, who tends to be older and difficult to approach at work.

"The most important thing is to show interest in the person you're talking with and try to ask him or her questions," Igaki says.

"What do you usually do on weekends?" may be a good conversational gambit, because the topic will naturally lead to talking about his or her hobby.

However, you should be careful not to delve too deeply into a person's private life when you let your hair down after a few drinks.

"You have to be aware that some people don't want to talk about their love lives or family matters," Igaki says.

But it's all right discussing these subjects if the person you are talking to brings them up first.

If you don't drink much, you shouldn't force yourself. Act as if you are enjoying yourself as much as the people around you, she advises.

"It may be a good idea to order a soft drink like ginger ale, which looks a bit like beer," Igaki says.

After overimbibing, some people may become too talkative and embarrass others.

"Stick a food menu in front of them, change the subject, or go to the restroom to break off the conversation," Igaki says. "Don't take the conversation seriously, and invite someone else to join the conversation if needed."

Brewery companies provide similar information on the proper etiquette at drinking parties.

For example, Kirin Brewery Co. has a website, "Kirin Beer Daigaku" (Kirin beer college), that includes suggestions about where to sit at a party and pouring beer for other people.

"Unlike drinking with close friends, you have to maintain a feeling of tension when drinking with your colleagues and bosses. But you should try to enjoy yourself, and make the event a positive one," Igaki says.
