AI makes lovely progress in latest album

Jin Kiyokawa / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

AI's latest album Independent shows her progression as a singer as it features more powerful vocals and lyrics that are truly heartfelt.

With a variety of music encompassing soul, dance and even arrangements of string instruments, the album, released last month, demonstrates AI's expanded versatility. Each song stands out with its own unique character, giving Independent a positive vibe.

"It was a big challenge," AI said emphatically while describing the album's creation during an interview with The Yomiuri Shimbun.

AI has a natural talent for using her husky voice to belt out R&B songs and ballads. In this album she stepped beyond her comfort zone. For example, in "Hapinesu" (Happiness), which was released as a single in December, AI emphasizes the power of her voice by singing in a strong tone throughout the entire track. However, in "Yume no Muko" (Beyond the dream), she uses falsetto, while in "Dance Together," AI's voice is distorted by a synthesizer.

Independent is AI's first album after moving to a new record company. AI said she tried to take a new direction by keeping a flexible frame of mind while recording the album. During the seven-month production period, she sought advice and ideas from producers in Los Angeles and New York.

AI used lyrics aimed at making this album more heartfelt than her previous work.

"Before, I was trying to act tough and cool. So I never thought about giving a heartfelt name like 'One Love' to a song before," she said.

In "Hapinesu," which has been featured in a commercial, AI sings, "If you smile, more and more, happiness will spread around this world." She said the lyrics reflect how she felt after the Great East Japan Earthquake.

"I'm hoping everyone I meet will feel relieved from some of their worries. I think now is the time that I can convey my emotions to others because the multitude of events has left everyone feeling many things," AI said.

In December, she performed in the Michael Jackson Tribute Live with the late pop icon's brothers. AI had a strong performance at the Tokyo event, and even gave the impression that she outshone The Jacksons.

The singer said she dreams of being nominated for a Grammy Award, and her ambition drives her to work with artists abroad.

AI said: "Even more than a Grammy, what I really want is the power to persuade people through my lyrics. [Using this power] I'd love to deliver good messages, and become a person who can say words like 'Stop the war' to actually halt conflicts. I believe music has this kind of power, and that's how music has influenced me." 