8,600 U.S. marines to move from Okinawa

The Yomiuri Shimbun

A total of 8,600 U.S. marines are set to be relocated abroad from Okinawa Prefecture, according to sources familiar with Japanese and U.S. affairs.

Tokyo and Washington also agreed that Japan's financial assistance for the relocation, which has been the focus of attention in Japan, will include construction costs for training sites on the Tinian and Pagan islands of the Northern Mariana Islands, where the two governments plan joint defense drills.

The agreements were confirmed by foreign and defense officials from both countries at a vice ministerial meeting Thursday.

According to the agreement, as the U.S. relocation has been scaled down, the total relocation cost to Guam will be lowered from the 10.27 billion dollars (837 billion yen) agreed upon in 2006 to 8.7 billion dollars.

Japan will provide 3.12 billion dollars--the maximum amount of 2.8 million dollars agreed upon in 2009 in Guam, adjusted for inflation--in financial assistance.

Because Japan will cover the cost of building training sites on Tinian and Pagan, construction costs for Guam facilities will also be lowered from the amount decided upon in the 2006 agreement.

According to the latest agreement, the United States will return most of the warehouse areas at the Makiminato supply camp in Urasoe, as well as Camp Kuwae in Chatan and Naha Military Port in Naha. These locations will be returned, regardless of how far relocation efforts to Guam have progressed, at the behest of the Okinawa prefectural government.

Meanwhile, a new panel will start talks on integrating five bases and facilities on southern Okinawa Island by the end of the year.

Of the 8,600 U.S. marines to be relocated, 4,000 will be sent to Guam, 2,600 to Hawaii, 1,200 to Australia and 800 to the U.S. mainland.

The number of U.S. marines based in Okinawa Prefecture is now 19,500.

Although the two governments had agreed to reduce the number of U.S. marines stationed in Okinawa Prefecture to 10,000, the 10,900 remaining soldiers will stay in the prefecture for the time being.