Over 3,000 illegal postings left on 2channel

The Yomiuri Shimbun

The operator of the 2channel Internet bulletin board did not delete 3,026 posts containing illegal information during the six months through June last year, despite orders from police to remove them, according to the National Police Agency.

The number tripled from the corresponding period in the previous year and police said the site apparently has become a hotbed of crime.

The Metropolitan Police Department recently raided sites related to the online bulletin board on suspicion of abetting crimes under a special law concerning narcotics.

The MPD is currently expediting efforts to single out individuals who are supposed to be responsible for deleting such messages, believing that leaving the postings untouched fostered illegal drug trading.

Since 2009, the NPA has been regularly checking websites that often fail to delete postings regarding illegal affairs for at least two months after police request they do so.

In the first half of 2009, 522 postings of illegal information were found to have been left untouched on the 2channel site. Since then, the website has contained the largest amount of such postings in the nation.

The number of posts containing illegal information on 2channel increased particularly rapidly in the first half of last year, to more than 3,000. This was far more than the site with the second-largest number, which had only 15 such posts.

Looking at types of postings, 2,639, or 87 percent, were related to illegal drugs; 309 were about trading of bank accounts; and 78 were about trading of cell phones.

Many such postings used code words to refer to illegal drugs, their prices and e-mail addresses.

Drug dealers who are contacted by potential buyers designate places where transactions will be conducted, or send drugs through parcel delivery services and have recipients pay on delivery, according to the police.

A crackdown on a group of stimulant drug dealers in November by the Kagawa prefectural police and other authorities found that the group members had earned about 100 million yen in six months using the 2channel site.

Police across the nation file a request by e-mail for such postings to be deleted as soon as they locate them on the 2channel site. However, the operator of the site does not reply, and individuals called "sakujonin" (people who delete) are said to voluntarily conduct the work.

But police said most such postings, especially those related to illegal drugs, have not been deleted.

A senior NPA official said, "Many other websites proactively delete posts related to illegal affairs, but posts about drugs and other illegal affairs are prevalent on the 2channel site."

The 2channel site is Japan's largest online bulletin board website, opened by Hiroyuki Nishimura in 1999. Users can post messages anonymously in nearly 1,000 sections on a wide range of topics including politics, love affairs and anime.

According to a book written by Nishimura and other sources, the operating rights of the 2channel site were transferred to a Singapore company in 2009. However, Japanese authorities found the company was a dummy firm.

===

Is Internet a lure for drugs?

More than 60 percent of the people detained last year for using illegal drugs likely started using them through the Internet, police announced Thursday.

Police detained 337 people last year on suspicion they obtained stimulant drugs and cannabis via online bulletin boards.

When the NPA asked the suspects why they used the Internet to purchase the drugs and cannabis, 221 of them, or 66 percent, said they did not know any drug dealers. Multiple answers were allowed.

Many also cited the anonymity of the Internet as a reason for using websites to obtain drugs.

Fifty-nine people said they thought it would be difficult for police to arrest them if they used an online transaction, and 40 said it was because they could buy drugs without meeting dealers.

Sixty-seven percent of the suspects had no past criminal records, leading the NPA to believe the Internet had prompted them to begin using illegal drugs.

According to the NPA, 41 percent were in their 30s and 29 percent were in their 20s.

Most used mobile phones to look for such information, police said. About 90 percent of the drugs they bought were stimulant drugs.
