N. Korea envoy met with Nakai '4 times'

The Yomiuri Shimbun

The North Korean envoy in charge of Japanese affairs met and held talks with Hiroshi Nakai, a former state minister in charge of the abduction issue, four times, it has been learned.

Song Il Ho acknowledged meeting with Nakai, a Democratic Party of Japan lawmaker who chairs the House of Representatives Budget Committee, when he met a Japanese delegation that visited North Korea around the time of that country's failed attempt to launch a missile earlier this month.

This is the first time the North Korean envoy in charge of Japanese affairs has acknowledged meeting with Nakai.

Previously, it had been reported that Nakai had met informally with high-ranking North Korean officials, including Song, to discuss the issue of Japanese abducted by North Korean agents several decades ago.

According to sources, Song met about 20 members of the Japanese delegation in a restaurant in central Pyongyang for about one hour Monday afternoon.

Asked whether he had met with Nakai, Song told the delegation they "met four times at his request." However, Song did not seem satisfied with his meetings with Nakai, whom he described as "lacking vision."

During a meeting with some delegation members, Song was quoted as saying, "I'm ready to meet any party members if they want to see me."

Song stuck to his country's position that the abduction issue has already been resolved. "Even if we're asked to return more abductees, it will be impossible to give back their lives," he reportedly said.

Two meetings between Nakai and a high-ranking North Korean official believed to be Song reportedly took place in Changchun in January 2011 and Shenyang in January this year.

They also reportedly discussed the return of the remains of Imperial Japanese Army soldiers who died in North Korea after being transferred from the former Soviet Union, where they were detained after the end of World War II.

Nakai has not publicly acknowledged meeting with Song. The Japanese government has denied any involvement in the meetings.