Japan may partly shoulder costs of Tinian base

The Yomiuri Shimbun

Washington is positively considering Tokyo's proposal to shoulder part of its expenses for development of a U.S. base and related facilities in Tinian, one of the Northern Mariana Islands and a self-governing territory of the United States, sources close to Japan-U.S. relations said Tuesday.

Tokyo apparently made the proposal to fend off Washington's demand that Japan increase its share of the costs of the realignment of U.S. forces in Japan. The realignment is currently under review.

The Japanese government plans to shoulder the development costs in Tinian, an island with a population of 3,000. It would do so to establish a joint training base for both countries, since the Ground Self-Defense Force is planning joint military exercises with the U.S. Marine Corps on the island, eight kilometers from Saipan and 160 kilometers from Guam, according to the sources.

Washington is urging Japan to adopt a greater financial burden in the realignment, but Tokyo is asking the United States to maintain the Japan-U.S. agreement in 2006 that capped the Japanese burden at 2.8 billion dollars (230 billion yen).

Tokyo is hoping to break this stalemate by shouldering part of U.S. expenses for development of the facilities on the island, in addition to Japan's share of costs for relocating U.S. marines in Okinawa Prefecture to Guam.

Japan made the proposal to shoulder part of the development costs in Tinian, which was also discussed at vice-ministerial-level talks held Friday between foreign and defense officials of the two countries.

Ground Self-Defense Force personnel and U.S. marines have been conducting joint amphibious exercises at a U.S. marine base in California and other locations. However, they could not find a suitable location in the western Pacific.

The Japanese side believes the GSDF will be able to conduct such exercises with U.S. marines more often and improve its capabilities if the exercises can be held in Tinian, where 70 percent of the land is rented by the U.S. military.

The U.S. side is said to be receptive to the proposal because U.S. marines have difficulty conducting large-scale exercises in Guam, partly due to the proximity of training facilities to civilian residential areas.

The 2006 agreement stipulates Japan should spend up to 2.8 billion dollars to relocate U.S. marines in Okinawa Prefecture to Guam.

However, in reviewing the realignment plan, Washington is demanding Tokyo increase this amount to 4 billion dollars (330 billion yen) by removing the ceiling from the agreement.