China stops deportations of N. Koreans

Seiichiro Takeuchi and Jumpei Momma / Yomiuri Shimbun Correspondents

BEIJING--The Chinese government has suspended deporting North Korean defectors in accordance with a request from the South Korean government, according to sources working for Chinese and North Korean authorities.

Diplomatic sources said the move indicated Beijing's displeasure with Pyongyang for ignoring China's demand to refrain from internationally problematic actions, such as last week's long-range ballistic missile launch.

A source working for authorities in China's Liaoning Province said the number of North Korean defectors has increased since the death of former leader Kim Jong Il in December last year.

The source said at the peak, nearly 30 North Koreans defected to Liaoning and Jilin provinces in China on an almost daily basis.

The source said: "The defectors would lose their lives if they are sent back. We can't overlook this."

Although the source confirmed that China has stopped deporting North Korean defectors, it is unknown when the suspension began.

Another source working for Chinese authorities said, "From the beginning, North Korea kept China in the dark about the details about its missile launch plan."

The suspension is partly because North Korea "has not been considerate to China, which is its ally."

Until recently, China has said it dealt with North Korean defectors "under domestic laws, international laws and the principles of humanitarianism."

As a result, China had sent back any defectors discovered by its authorities, causing South Korea to demand Beijing stop the deportations.

According to To Hui Yun, a representative from the Citizens' Coalition for Human Rights of Abductees and North Korean Refugees (CHNK), five defectors detained in a South Korean diplomatic office in China for nearly three years were permitted to depart.

In April, the defectors were "expelled from China" and left for South Korea.

When South Korean President Lee Myung Bak met with Chinese President Hu Jintao during a Nuclear Security Summit meeting in late March, Hu remarked China would respect South Korea's position on the treatment of North Korean defectors.

Diplomatic sources have assumed that since then, China has become more flexible in regard to its deportation policy for North Korean defectors. 