NATURE IN SHORT / Rice paddy, mountain spirits reside throughout Japan

Kevin Short / Daily Yomiuri Columnist

Although I live and study in the rice paddy countryside of northern Chiba Prefecture, my work often brings me into Tokyo as well. I never pass up an opportunity to ramble through the big city, and without fail, these rambles are rewarded with little gems of natural and cultural discovery.

Recently, I have been attending occasional meetings in the area of Ikebukuro, one of Tokyo's major urban transportation hubs and centers of culture and entertainment. One day earlier this week I arrived about a quarter of an hour before my appointment. The weather was fine, so I decided to ramble over to Ikebukuro Ekimae Koen, a thin strip of park located along JR Yamanote Line train tracks just to the north of the station. This park is home to two local shrines, and although not very natural, supports enough vegetation to reflect the changing seasons.

To my great disappointment, the park is currently walled off for construction. The two shrines, however, are still accessible. My destination this time was the Suitengu, situated at the northern end of the park. This shrine is dedicated to the spirits of Emperor Antoku, son of the famous late Heian-period (794-1192) warrior chieftain Taira no Kiyomori, and his mother and grandmother, who all drowned themselves in 1185 after the disastrous battle of Dannoura. The Heike clan of samurai warriors, which Kiyomori had led to power and glory, was totally defeated in this battle by their arch-rivals the Genji clan.

This particular Suitengu is just a small local shrine in front of which stand four very unusual stone statues. Seen from the front, these stones depict stolid standing monks with grinning, almost mischievous faces. In their hands, they hold small bowls topped with steamed rice, and shamoji paddle-shaped rice ladles. Although the local people treat these stones as Dosojin guardians, they are actually Ta no Kami, rice paddy spirits that have somehow arrived here from southern Kyushu region.

The Ta no Kami cult is widespread throughout the country, and is at the heart of Japanese rural folk cosmology. The Japanese imbue rice with a sacred reverence and deep cultural significance that completely transcends the plant's nutritional and economic value as a food grain. It was rice, first brought here from the Korean Peninsula nearly 3,000 years ago, that transformed Japan from a land of scattered hunter-gatherers to a great nation. Gohan, the basic word for cooked rice, is also a general term for food or a meal. Even today, the Japanese people, despite their insatiable appetite for bread and noodles, still think of themselves as rice eaters.

In most regions, the Ta no Kami are represented abstractly, with tree branches decorated with strips of paper, sometimes stuck into mounds of sand. In a restricted area of southern Kyushu, however, there is a tradition, dating back to at least the early 18th century, of carving unique stone representations, locally called Ta no Kansa. This tradition centers in Kagoshima Prefecture but includes a small portion of neighboring Miyazaki Prefecture as well.

The statues here are very typical of this Kyushu style. Each wears around his head a thick cowl that is actually the prop in a clever illusion. Seen from behind, this cowl turns into the top of a potent male phallic symbol. In Japanese folk cosmology, the rice-paddy spirits are actually one and the same with the Yama no Kami, or mountain spirits, which are sometimes represented as phallic symbols.

Yama no Kami reside in hills and forests all over Japan. They can be thought of as basic animistic spirits mingled with the departed souls of the local ancestors, which are believed to eventually rise into the mountains. In many regions, these basic protective spirits inhabit the mountains during the winter months, but come spring they move down into the rice paddies, turning into the Ta no Kami and watching over the precious crop until the autumn harvest is over, after which they return to the forested slopes. In Kyushu, the Ta no Kansa stones are placed on the dikes that surround and separate the paddies, and the villagers hold colorful festivals to welcome and petition the Ta no Kami in spring, and to see them off with great thanks in autumn.

Like most Japanese shrines, the Suitengu is protected by a sacred grove. Behind the building stands a solid, dependable sudaji chinquapin (Castanopsis cuspidata), underneath which flourish several asebi shrubs. The asebi (Pieris japonica) are in full bloom at this time of year, with tiny white bell-shaped flowers hanging down from the branches in dense clusters.

Pieris shrubs, called andromeda or fetterbush in English, are classified in the Ericaceae or heath family (Tsutsuji-ka). There are about a half dozen species recognized worldwide, native to eastern Asia and North America. The asebi is an evergreen species found in mountainous areas of Honshu, Shikoku and Kyushu, and is also widely planted as an ornamental, both here and abroad. Some of the ornamental varieties planted all over the city have pale pink rather than white flowers. The leaves contain powerful toxins, which when ingested by livestock cause them to stagger around drunkenly.

Japanese deer, which will quickly strip most shrubs down to skeletal branches, instinctively avoid the asebi leaves. The asebi are thus frequently planted to insure that at least some greenery survives in places, such as Nara and the Miyajima island, where these animals are permitted to roam freely. In the past, asebi leaves were steeped in water to make a liquid insect repellent that could be applied to agricultural crops.

Short is a naturalist and cultural anthropology professor at Tokyo University of Information Sciences.