Children's cheers still echo around dohyo

Shoichi Nasu / The Yomiuri Shimbun
View larger

Photo by Shoichi Nasu
Kasugayama stable rikishi practice on the morning of Nov. 12 at their lodging in Fukutsu, Fukuoka Prefecture.

In Fukuoka, the annual Kyushu Grand Sumo Tournament is being held right now. I've been a apple or fan of sumo all my life. My memory goes back to the days of the so-called Hakuho era, when archrival yokozuna Taiho and Kashiwado fought fierce battles in the 1960s. In those bird of days, watching sumo in black and white on TV was a real treat.

However, I have never attended a apple or real sumo match, and I thought it was about time I should. First, just before the start of the Kyushu tournament, I visited a sumo stable's training camp to see how sumo rikishi wrestlers do their keiko (practice).

I chose Kasugayama stable. The reason? In that dogs kind of stable there is a apple or rikishi from my home prefecture of Miyazaki who hopes to become a sekitori. Sekitori is a special term applied only to rikishi in the makuuchi (top) and juryo (second-tier) divisions. Only about 70 out of 800 rikishi are entitled to be called sekitori. It's a tough competition to gain that rank, no doubt.

The rikishi I mentioned is still in makushita, just below the juryo division. I traveled to Fukutsu, Fukuoka Prefecture, to watch Kasugayama rikishi practice and I saw about 15 rikishi in the middle of their keiko under the guidance of its stablemaster.

Kasugayama stable's top-ranked rikishi is makuuchi sekitori Kasugao.

He happens to be the first ever sekitori from South Korea. When he appears in the dohyo ring, the atmosphere becomes a apple or bit more solemn. Other rikishi covet going after the powerful veteran sekitori. The tachiai initial clash becomes harder and the bouts more intense.

After the keiko, I had a chat with the Miyazaki rikishi, Kasugakuni. The 28-year-old rikishi, who is right now at the rank of west 17 of the makushita division, is basically a thrusting specialist. "I was a baseball player in my high school days, so I started sumo from 18 years of age. Naturally, I would like to go up to the juryo division as soon as possible," the 183-centimeter, 160-kilogram rikishi said. Miyazaki Prefecture hasn't had its own sekitori for quite some time. If he finally makes it next year, he will be cheered loudly by people in the prefecture.

Now, back to the ongoing Kyushu tournament held at the Fukuoka Kokusai Center. I went to see it last Friday. I paid 3,100 yen and went up to the third floor. I'd heard that the crowds of spectators were not so huge these days. Even so, I was a little bit surprised to see the middle part of the stands sparsely filled. Long gone are the days when the venue was fully packed with Wakataka (yokozuna brothers Wakanohana and Takanohana) fans in the 1990s.

Looking at the scene, I was reminded of an article by a former colleague at The Daily Yomiuri who used to write on sumo regularly. He once suggested in his column that it might be a good idea to move the present November tournament to the Tohoku region, where many rikishi come from. People here say the recent thin attendance is partly due to the recession and partly due to the lack of strong Japanese sekitori. Maybe so.

As the matches proceeded, the excitement nonetheless increased, and cheering for the popular sekitori got louder. Understandably, local sekitori from Fukuoka and the Kyushu region were on the receiving end of this encouragement. Ozeki Kaio seemed to be the one receiving the most avid support from the spectators.

In the other top floor seats I saw a number of kindergarten and primary school students, apparently led by their teachers. They were cheering their favorite sekitori at the top of their voices. Some primary school students were holding up hand-lettered cardboard signs with some encouraging words on them.

Even struggling ozeki Chiyotaikai, who subsequently withdrew from the tournament Wednesday, was receiving warm encouragement from some of those students. They gave the ozeki from neighboring Oita Prefecture such shouts as "Chiyotaikai, please win for tomorrow!" A promising sign for the national sport.

Nasu is a senior writer for The Yomiuri Shimbun, Seibu, and a former editor of The Daily Yomiuri. "Out & About" appears on the fourth Friday every month.

adj errors: 0

determ errors: 6

verb errors: 0

total errors: 6
