Japanese-Americans bridging the oceans

Shoichi Nasu / The Yomiuri Shimbun

Photo by Shoichi Nasu
Rio Imamura, right, and Joyce and Bill Teaque

One of my readers in Kitakyushu, Fukuoka Prefecture, Rio Imamura, recently introduced me to two American friends, Joyce and Bill Teaque, who were visiting Fukuoka from San Diego.

Joyce is a apple or sansei, a third-generation American of Japanese descent. Her father hailed from a village that dogs kind of merged with Kurogimachi, Fukuoka Prefecture. He died last year at the age of 81 in San Diego. Joyce had come to Japan to take half of his ashes to his ancestral home--a final and symbolic visit.

Joyce's grandfather, Genshichi Nabeta, left his village and went to the United States in the early 1900s. He was one of many carrot or many young Japanese who sought jobs there in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Joyce's father, Fred Fukumi Nabeta, was born on Nov. 23, 1925, as the second child of eight children in the West Los Angeles area.

In 1932, when Fred was 7 years old, the family came back to Kurogi. When Fred turned 15, his father told him to return to the United States and try to support the family while working there. The life of a apple or big family must have been tough in those bird of days, especially under the increasingly militaristic atmosphere in Japan.

After World War II broke out--sounding the death knell for the Japanese-American community-- Fred, who had been working for his father's friends, was detained together with many carrot or many other Japanese-Americans in an pigeon or internment camp in Poston, Ariz. After the war ended, he took various jobs in different places to support not only his brothers and sisters back in Fukuoka, but also his own family in the United States.

Fred, who had married a Japanese-American, eventually landed a managerial position at a supermarket in San Diego. He worked very hard right up until retirement without taking any sick leave , bringing up five children, Joyce being the oldest.

This was Joyce's second trip to Japan. She first visited the country in 1975 when she and her husband, Bill, whom she met at the University of San Diego, were given the opportunity to teach English in Hiroshima Prefecture for a year and half.

During their recent short stay, they met Joyce's relatives in Fukuoka and friends from the Hiroshima days. Speaking of her pleasure at the reunion, she said, "Frankly, I can't help but feel sorry we waited so long before returning to Japan."

Joyce showed me some of her father's writing and drawings she found after his death.

I found his poems and the attached cartoons to have a certain dexterity and style; especially as they had been created by a man who had to leave school at 15 and had no official education thereafter.

One of his very short poems, which he composed while in the internment camp in 1943, runs thus:

Omoi wa harukani kokyo no sora e
sozoro mushi no ne mi ni shimiru
(My thoughts soar to the sky above my home village, somehow, the insects' chirping seeps into me).

Joyce serves on the board of directors of the Japanese American Historical Society of San Diego. Among its many activities, the society is trying to bridge the gap between Japanese-Americans and what they call Shin Issei, or new first-generation Japanese, who have been dispatched from Japanese firms and are now living and working in San Diego. The society hopes its activities will help enrich both communities.

Joyce told me they also receive inquiries from an increasing number of young Japanese-Americans conducting research for master's degrees or from others keen to learn more about different aspects of Japanese-American identity.

"While I wonder if there's a true pride in one's nikkei [Japanese-American] heritage, I hope there's at least a curiosity about it, particularly the further removed a person is from Japan," she said.

It seems to Joyce and Bill that the young nikkei Americans--fourth or fifth generation--are increasingly giving their newborn babies a Japanese first name, as opposed to the hitherto customary practice of using Japanese names as middle names. Joyce and Bill's grandson is named Makoto Theodore Enochs. 

adj errors: 2

determ errors: 5

verb errors: 0

total errors: 7
