Kochi adventure awakens the hero within

Shingo Masuda / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

KAMI, Kochi--Ah...Anpanman! In contrast to his usual, friendly look in kids' anime and picture books, the statue of the beloved national hero standing in this mountainous region in Shikoku looks rather serious. He raises his round fist toward the sky. What's on his mind?

The statue of Anpanman stands in front of the Yanase Takashi Memorial Hall Anpanman Museum in Kami. The character's creator, Takashi Yanase, hails from the city and donated the three-meter-tall statue in July to commemorate the 15th anniversary of the museum.

"Last year was a grueling year as we faced the earthquake," said curator Miyuki Semba. "To 'protect everybody's dream' [to quote Anpanman's popular theme song] in Japan today, he can't look sweet. [The serious face] came from the designer's wish to convey that idea."

Walking around the museum filled with popular characters from the anime, I remembered when I first met Anpanman as a child at the primary school library more than 30 years ago.

I vividly recall how the hero tore off a piece of his own head--which happens to be a large bun filled with sweet red bean paste--and fed it to a hungry and crying child.

What an unbelievable hero! It seemed impossible to sacrifice oneself like that to save someone. But Anpanman taught me that generosity means strength.

I decided to become a journalist with the ambition of helping people in trouble. But years later, I found myself at the age of 42 with my idealistic ambition having faded away.

"Yanase had not been blessed with a big hit for a long time. He released Anpanman in 1969 at the age of 50," Semba said.

That comment was a relief and a source of encouragement. It also was a strong blow from Anpanman to wake up my flaccid mind.

The city of Kami has developed along the Monobegawa river, which was Yanase's childhood playground. My room at a riverside inn with an onsen hot spring overlooked the city.

===

Into the depths of the Earth

Stepping into the Ryugado cave, designated as a special national treasure, is an adventure. The standard tour weaves through the cave along a path that narrows and bulges as it goes.

A reservation is necessary to sign up for an "adventure course" with a cave tour guide.

"Put these on, please," said Mamoru Sakamoto as he handed me a helmet, coveralls, gloves and boots. With small headlamps on our helmets to light the way, we ventured into the darkness.

The four-kilometer-long cave has many things to see. It is a natural fantasy world formed by calciferous groundwater over 175 million years. Wavy layers of a mineral called phyllite looked like an aurora, while stalactites and stalagmites took the shapes of a rhinoceros, a dolphin and even--if you look from just the right angle--Kochi Prefecture hero Sakamoto Ryoma (1835-1867) in his iconic standing pose.

The adventure tour branches off from the illuminated main route to a more challenging route. With the help of my headlamp, I fumbled my way along.

"There they are," said Sakamoto as he directed the beam of his headlamp to the rock wall. "They" were sleeping bats.

Expert guidance is definitely required to clamber through the narrow and convoluted maze of the cave.

"Here, twist your shoulder a bit, put your hand on the ground, and then pull one foot up," the veteran cave guide explained.

But I misheard the order and almost wound up standing on my head.

Sakamoto took me to every corner of the cave, spending more than two hours underground before reaching the exit.

Outside, I got a certificate of clearing the cave. It reads, "Be a man undaunted by adventures and young at heart."

Keeping the advice in mind, I ventured into the city's nightlife to seek whatever experiences might await me. I don't have a eraser. I wanted thing to fix the car.