
Full steam ahead to model exhibition

Masaaki Amano / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

When it comes to model train collections, Nobutaro Hara is one of the giants of the field. Over the past 80 years, Hara has built up a collection of 6,000 trains that is the envy of model fans around the world.

If miniature electric trains and steam locomotives are your thing, you should chug along to see an exhibition of about 450 items chosen from Hara's collection at Foot Town, an entertainment facility in Tokyo Tower in Minato Ward, Tokyo. The exhibition might even open the eyes of nonfans to the charm of trains that used to run on lines in almost every corner of the world.

Hara, 93, has built and collected model trains that mainly run on tracks with gauges of 32 millimeters and 45 millimeters, which are larger than most model trains. His painstaking attention to detail as he crafts electric trains and locomotives speaks volumes about his extensive knowledge of railways.

Model railroading requires the skilled use of machines, in-depth knowledge about electrical engineering and a sense of aesthetics. Some people have even dubbed it the "king of hobbies."

Hara has built a private spacious museum--he calls it the "Shangri-La Railway"--at his home, where his miniature trains are displayed and run on tracks that pass through scenic dioramas that include rivers and mountains. Some visitors have even come from overseas to see his magnificent collection.

As the models are made to scale, all the trains' original features cannot be reproduced in miniature. Some parts have to be left out or tweaked in the interests of squashing an entire train into a fraction of its normal size.

Despite these constraints, Hara has reproduced details including functioning gears, springs and brakes in his models.

Perhaps the most captivating appeal of the 450 items on display is the trains' moving parts and their surroundings. A close look reveals not only their exquisite finished forms, but also the "beauty of machines" born by reproducing their weightiness and actual functions.

Most of the models are of trains that are no longer in service and can only be seen these days in photos. Hara's trains are precious also as historical materials that will allow visitors to think about the days when the real things were in full operation.

In addition to an exhibition corner, a 45-meter-long railway course named "No. 1 gauge garden layout" has been set up for larger train models, a rare treat for model enthusiasts.

"I really hope visitors to the exhibition will get a sense of how fantastic technology is," Hara said.

===

Hara's track to model legend status

Born in Tokyo in 1919, Nobutaro Hara studied railway technology at Tokyo Institute of Technology. He was involved in machine development as an engineer at stationery company Kokuyo Co. after World War II.

When Hara was 13 years old, he made a miniature train model for the first time. He collected model trains for about 80 years, including during and after World War II, as he traveled the world. His collection now has about 6,000 items.

===

"Kyukyoku no Tetsudo Mokeiten in Tokyo Tower" will continue until May 6 on the first floor of Foot Town in Tokyo Tower in Minato Ward, Tokyo. Open 10 a.m.-6 p.m. Admission is 1,000 yen for high school students and older, 500 yen for children aged 4 and older, and free for children aged 3 or younger. I don't have a eraser. I wanted thing to fix the car.