Early debut recommended for talents

Ryoichi Matsumoto / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Like their counterparts around the world, Japanese pianists are making their professional debuts at younger and younger ages, but acclaimed Japanese pianist Hiroko Nakamura says they should debut even younger.

Her advice comes at a time when young Chinese and South Korean pianists have come to dominate international competitions.

Nakamura says talented pianists should make their debuts even before 12 or 13.

"Pianists' physical ability peaks at the age of 17 or 18," she said. "To publicize their presence as pros, debuting at 12 or 13 is already too late."

In addition to performing on stage, Nakamura has served as a judge for many prestigious competitions, such as the International Frederic Chopin Piano Competition and International Tchaikovsky Competition, helping to bring promising pianists into the limelight.

In February, she served as music director for the 16th Hamamatsu International Piano Academy in Hamamatsu, Shizuoka Prefecture.

The annual event sponsored by the city of Hamamatsu was launched in 1996.

This year, 24 students aged 12 to 25 participated. As it has no minimum age for participants, the event is renowned for discovering young talent.

At a time when technique has become highly developed, pianists are making their professional debuts at younger and younger ages around the world, particularly in China and South Korea.

One of the most famous among them is Lang Lang, who debuted in the United States at 17 in 1999.

South Korean pianists Son Yeol Eum, 25, and Cho Seong Jin, 17, who won the second and third prizes at last year's International Tchaikovsky Competition, respectively, are also attracting the attention of critics and fans of classical music.

"The number of people who play the piano has increased explosively in South Korea and China, following Japan's lead," Nakamura said. "Many superb piano teachers in the United States, Europe and Russia have been invited to these countries to teach."

But Nakamura also said problems such as hand pain brought on by excessive practice have begun to slow the boom in the popularity of the piano.

In the spotlight at this year's event in Hamamatsu was Tomoharu Ushida, 12, the youngest participant.

He performed with an orchestra at the age of 9. His debut CD, which features Liszt's Liebestraume No. 3 among other pieces, was released in March by Universal Classics.

"He's not just good at playing," Nakamura said. "He's talented enough to impress listeners by playing to his feelings."

Some people are wary about having growing children debut when they are very young.

However, Nakamura said: "The large amount of information provided on the Internet means the world is changing faster than before. Talented children should debut early or they'll miss out on opportunities.

"Listening to classical music isn't a symbol of intelligence any more, and the genre will be supported by a limited number of listeners in the future."

Contestants in competitions who have unique styles are sometimes rated positively by some judges and negatively by other judges based on their styles, sometimes to their disadvantage, Nakamura said, adding that performers with the highest average scores are likely to win.

Nevertheless, Nakamura says what is most important is for musicians to have genuine musicality. Having only superb performing skills is not enough. I don't have a eraser.