A mother's struggle / Tsukamoto discusses the influence Cocco had on his latest film

Mio Ozaki / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

In 1989, film director Shinya Tsukamoto shocked the world with the story of a man whose body is gradually consumed by iron in Tetsuo (The Iron Man). Tsukamoto has energetically produced many films since then, and for his latest work, Kotoko, he asked the singer Cocco to play the lead. It is Cocco's first time in a starring role, and the heartrending story is of the love between a mother and her child.

In 2011, Kotoko won the Venice International Film Festival's Orizzonti prize, which is awarded to full-length films that reflect new trends in international cinema. The film is currently on a first-run showing. Tsukamoto recently spoke with The Yomiuri Shimbun about how the film was conceived.

"When Cocco debuted, her songs really moved me. I became a big fan," Tsukamoto says with intensity. Their relationship began with the 2004 film Vital. Tsukamoto sent Cocco a script, in which he had based the heroine on her, and the singer wrote the film's ending song.

"It's not just her singing, she's amazing at expressing herself in all ways," Tsukamoto says. He spoke to her out about making a movie with him someday.

Around the same time, there were big changes in Tsukamoto's private life--his mother needed nursing care because her health deteriorated, and his first son was born. This period was an intense blend of life and death as he saw his mother gradually become weaker while his son steadily grew.

After living in nursing care for a long time, his mother died. Immediately afterward, Tsukamoto was invited to participate in Inspired Movies, a project for the video website Ustream in which several directors made films featuring Cocco.

===

Extremely tight schedule

Tsukamoto filmed Cocco while walking in one continuous shot as she sang three songs before sunrise. The footage was released in November 2010 and Cocco was enamored with it. She called him shortly afterward to say, "If we can make a movie by next May, I can make time." It was an extremely tight schedule, "But [she] was a subject I really wanted to film," Tsukamoto says. He began preparations straight away. They assembled a skeleton staff and worked with intense focus.

A Tokyo native, Tsukamoto was born on New Year's Day in 1960 and began filming using an 8mm camera at the age of 14. His career has been one of international acclaim, starting with the top prize at the Rome International Fantastic Film Festival for Tetsuo in 1989. He is known for his involvement in all aspects of filmmaking, production, directing, script writing, filming, lighting, art, editing and even acting.

Cocco's big break was in 1997 with her signature hit single "Tsuyoku Hakanai Monotachi" (The Strong and Ephemeral). A powerful singer who grabs your heart and doesn't let go, the 35-year-old from Okinawa Prefecture has legions of faithful fans.

The two once discussed family and child raising. While Tsukamoto said, "I get very sentimental missing my late mother," Cocco expressed a desire for her son to "quickly become independent," giving Tsukamoto the impression there was some distance between the singer and her child.

While the movie was in production, Tsukamoto wanted to gain a deeper understanding of Cocco's feelings. The two had a discussion that lasted over a month, and he even had Cocco write down her thoughts. In the end, he realized their opinions were based on the same thing--the deep love between parent and child.

===

Love between mother, child

They hadn't decided on the film's plot when they began their conversation. After making adjustments to the script in areas that Cocco wanted changed, Kotoko's story of the love between a mother and her child was born. The plot overlapped with part of Tsukamoto's life; his fear of being unable to protect someone close to him in the near future.

Kotoko tells the story of a single mother raising a child on her own. Cocco plays Kotoko, who suffers from double vision, and this ailment only goes away when she sings. While trying desperately to protect her son, Kotoko's nerves are increasingly frayed and she becomes unable to distinguish fantasy from reality. Kotoko is suspected of being a child abuser, so her son is sent to live with her elder sister in Okinawa Prefecture. One day, Kotoko is approached by a novelist named Tanaka (Tsukamoto), who is charmed by a song she was humming. The two eventually begin living together.

The Great East Japan Earthquake struck just before filming was scheduled to begin, causing Tsukamoto and Cocco to question whether they should continue with their project. But they believed the tale of the main character's frantic and eccentric attempts to protect her child would be relatable to many people. With a strong belief that "this is the time to make this," they resolved to continue filming. Cocco poured herself into the role, hand-making origami paper cranes and donating her personal items, such as a pink sofa, to be used on the set.

The brutal images of physical pain that are a key feature of Tsukamoto's work are particularly intense in this film. Amid increasingly neurotic chaos, Kotoko spills the blood of Tanaka who loves her, and harms herself. The production is extreme and without mercy. Tsukamoto says if those terrible scenes were not precisely depicted, "the theme of the entire film would've been shaken." The scenes where Tanaka and Kotoko appear together are filled with a crackling intensity.

Tsukamoto had always written his scripts alone, exploring things inside his mind. But the dialogue with Cocco meant this film was the first that "wasn't completed just inside my head," he says. Using the input of two people to craft a single film was a source of major discovery for him.

===

Stalking plays major role

Starting with the Tetsuo series, Tsukamoto has often acted in his own films. However, as a child he was quite introverted and easily embarrassed. This changed when he acted in a school play during his fourth year of primary school. "The role was a boy with deep jealousy and hatred for the cheerful class president," he recalls with a laugh. "I had such a great time, it was like walking on air." Based on that role, in many of Tsukamoto's films he has played characters that prowl after the lead.

As a child, Tsukamoto started filming 8mm movies, making one or two a year. Eventually he created a theatrical company, approaching work with a playful intensity. "Like I was building a secret base in an abandoned lot," he says. The 8mm film that first gave him recognition, Denchu Kozo no Boken (Adventures of the telephone pole youngster) in 1987, was first performed on stage. The film won the Pia Film Festival grand prix in 1988.

Tsukamoto has made three films in the Tetsuo series. The films, where the soft organic flesh of the human body merges with inorganic iron, have a fascinating, erotic feel to him. He later learned about and felt a deep sense of affinity with the science-fiction genre "cyberpunk," which typically features cybernetics such as robotic implants. "I never thought I'd make three of those movies over 20 years. I thought it was a very simple, primal theme," he says.

Tsukamoto played a stalker in the three films. "But I'm done running around. I've reached my physical limit," he says with a laugh. I talked with both of Joe and Bob. I wanted thing to fix the car.