New voice in the world of 'anison'

Shoji Ichihara / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

A young star has come into the spotlight in the world of animation songs (anison). Konomi Suzuki, nicknamed "Konomin," is just 15 years old, but her singing skills and enthusiastic full-body expression are outstanding. In the new animation Tasogare Otome x Amnesia (Dusk maiden of amnesia), which will air on Animax TV in April, she sings the opening theme song "Choir Jail."

"I eat, sleep, talk and sing--it's what I've done every day as long as I can remember," Suzuki told The Yomiuri Shimbun.

Suzuki, who was born in Osaka Prefecture, has been studying singing and dancing since she was a little girl. She has considerable experience in the entertainment world, having played Anne in the play Anne of Green Gables. In October 2011, she won the Fifth All-Japan Anison Grand Prix, an anison competition that had a record 10,223 hopefuls.

Suzuki had devoted herself to preparing for the audition.

"In the last few days before the final, I rented a studio until late at night to do special training," she said.

"Even if I couldn't sing anymore, I wouldn't feel regret."--Her passionate singing, enhanced by that strong emotion, won over the judges.

Recalling the moment she was named winner of the grand prix, Suzuki said, "I was very pleased, and I felt like the happiest person in the universe."

After her triumph, she decided to make her debut as a professional anison singer.

Suzuki's idol is Japanese female singer May'n. "She's very cute when she talks. But when she sings, she has a very determined look on her face. The difference is really huge, and the way she puts her heart into her singing is great, so I respect her," Suzuki said.

Since the contest, musician Aki Hata has been giving Suzuki singing lessons so she can make it as a professional. Hata hopes she can smooth off a few rough edges.

"Her weakness is that she can't sufficiently control her singing voice and feelings. Conversely, there's plenty of room for her to improve. I have high expectations for her from now on," Hata said.

Suzuki said she likes English, Japanese, mathematics and other subjects, but English is her best subject. This month, she entered an Osaka prefectural high school in a bid to simultaneously pursue her entertainment career and keep up with her studies.

"I have little life experience and I also lack physical strength. But I want to become an artist who leaves a lasting impression on audiences," she said with a broad smile.

However, Suzuki is mentally tough to cut it at the top level. She said that however difficult a situation is, she can forget the hardship after a good night's rest.

===

Story of 'Tasogare Otome x Amnesia'

Teiichi Niiya, a first-year private middle school student, encounters on the ghost of a girl named Yuko who introduces herself as "the ghost of the old school building."

To help Yuko regain her memories, the Paranormal Investigation Club is formed, and Teiichi and other members of the club explore mysteries and legends that have been transmitted by word of mouth in the school.

"Tasogare Otome x Amnesia" starts April 16 and will be broadcast on Animax TV from 10 p.m. to 10:30 p.m. every Monday.  He doesn't need some salt.