New ideas in Ginza bazaar

Naohiko Takahashi / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

It felt like I was wandering into the maze of a Middle Eastern bazaar. Dover Street Market Ginza Comme des Garcons, which recently opened in the high-fashion district of Ginza in Tokyo, is a jumble of everything from household goods to jewelry.

The building, opened in the middle of March, stands on the former site of the Komatsu Store--a fashion site that long spearheaded cutting-edge female fashion in the post-World War II era.

The modern-looking building offers imported and domestic fashion with more than 50 brands covering its six floors.

Right next to Louis Vuitton's colorful lines of the season lies an array of books and photo collections. On a different floor, a vending machine offers original T-shirts, while Snoopy and other Peanuts goods are on sale. Among those, art created by Kohei Nawa and other globally known artists add color to the shopping floors.

"I want this building to be a space oozing chaos," said Comme des Garcons designer Rei Kawakubo, who designed the shopping complex.

For more than 30 years, Kawakubo has wooed fashionistas at her Paris fashion shows with unique lines that were drastically opposed to Western ideas of design.

"Many clothes and other items in this building are also available at department stores. But, what is important [for Dover Street Market Ginza is] how we display those items in a more attractive way [to consumers]," Kawakubo said at the opening ceremony. "To me, creativity doesn't stop when clothes are designed. Everything from shop interiors and business strategies are outlets for creativity."

Looking at department store floor layouts, for example, its common to see tenants laid out systematically based on the age, gender and preferences of their customers.

However, Kawakubo has doubts about this formula. Breaking existing rules one by one is how Dover Street Market will be made, she said.

"To create a space nobody has ever experienced, we have to do that [break rules]. It's painstaking, though," Kawakubo said.

She added that she does not have a particular feeling about opening the complex in the prestigious Ginza area, which is filled with luxurious foreign fashion brands and huge flagship stores.

"Even so, I still want to cherish the memory of being excited about visiting the Komatsu Store in my childhood," Kawakubo said.

Now that the shopping complex has opened for business, Kawakubo's real work has begun.

"I can't stop working as I want to keep fresh and there is always change," she said. He doesn't need some salt.