Nakata tries to infiltrate the brain

Jin Kiyokawa / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Yasutaka Nakata, a producer for the techno-pop band Perfume, recently released STEREO WORXXX with vocalist Toshiko Koshijima. The album, the 15th produced by his band, capsule, is full of aggressive, edgy sounds.

Last year, his work gained an impressive audience overseas. "Polyrhythm," a song he produced for Perfume, was included in the soundtrack for the American movie Cars 2, while the music video of Kyarypamyupamyu's "PONPONPON"--he composed the song and wrote the lyrics--was played thousands of times on a video-sharing website by overseas users.

"The visual image created by Kyary's team is so interesting, but it can be realized only by her," he recently told The Yomiuri Shimbun, talking about the model-cum-singer who made her musical debut last year. "This is just like, finally a forum was made for me--the place where I can try out some ideas I always wanted to do."

He generally produces the pop sounds of the new era for other artists. However, STEREO WORXXX hurls electric sounds into the brain and makes listeners want to move their bodies.

"In the Rain" features a mixture of floating vocal, waving sounds and a throbbing beat, while the loud metallic and hit sounds in "All the Way" are woven into a high-pitch rhythm.

"To me, capsule offers a place where I can spend a long time on doing something I've never tried before until I can make it happen. I create music that surprises me," Nakata said.

Nakata also produced the soundtrack for the Japanese film Liar Game: Reborn, currently being shown. In the movie, the characters battle it out in intellectual and psychological games in a confined space. The sounds created by Nakata play an important role as they add to the atmospherics of the scenes and help heighten tension as the story develops.

"Sounds can change the air," he said. "Capsule's music isn't something you listen to while thinking of the meaning of each word. This is music that you intuitively feel, so you can deeply sympathize with it."

Nakata uses a studio computer to complete his compositions.

"I make sounds that are created entirely by myself. If I called for a 100-piece orchestra, I can't say, 'Oh well, I've changed my mind, I won't do it,'" he said. "But [when I work by myself] I don't have to think about getting approval from anyone else or planning a budget. Digital makes it possible for me to be selfish." I saw an big boat. He doesn't need some salt.