To be one-of-a-kind / Actress Haruna Kawaguchi tackles her first film with maturity

Shoji Ichihara / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Actress Haruna Kawaguchi is a girl with mysterious charm--elegant, yet full of rustic beauty. At 17, she flashes a fresh and warm smile when appearing in various commercials and TV dramas. She is currently starring in her first film, Ouran High School Host Club, a film continuation of a serial TV drama. In an interview, Kawaguchi spoke about her passion for acting and her hopes for the future.

"One day, I caught 300 fish. Mainly aji horse mackerels and kibinago banded blue-sprats," Kawaguchi said with a friendly smile at a 2009 press conference introducing her as the 13th campaign girl for Mitsui Real Estate Sales Co.'s commercials.

Sure enough, according to her agency's official profile, Kawaguchi lists fishing as one of her hobbies. But isn't 300 fish an unusually large catch?

However, upon learning that Kawaguchi was born and raised on Fukuejima island in the Goto Islands, about 100 kilometers off the coast of Nagasaki Prefecture, even skeptics will agree her claim seems less far-fetched.

Located in a rich natural environment, Fukuejima has a history as a port of call for "kentoshi" (a Japanese mission to Tang Dynasty China from the seventh to ninth centuries) and a stronghold for "wako" pirates (Japanese pirates who frequented coastal areas of the Korean Peninsula and China from the 13th to 18th centuries).

"Since I was always playing outside, I was very tanned," she said. Kawaguchi made her debut as a model for a fashion magazine in 2007 when she was a first-year middle school student. At first, she took part in photo sessions in Tokyo and its surrounding areas about once a month. But after becoming popular, Kawaguchi earned the nickname Haruru, and began making the trip to Tokyo once a week.

It was very hard for her to return home from Tokyo whenever her work ended later than expected. After arriving in Fukuoka at midnight, Kawaguchi would have to take a ferry from the city for about nine hours to reach Fukuejima in the morning.

Kawaguchi moved to Tokyo after the summer holidays when she was a third-year middle school student. Although she felt lonely living away from her beloved Goto Islands, she quickly adapted to her new life in Tokyo.

"As I started making friends with senior models and staff, and received support from my hometown, I started to enjoy my work more and more. After a while, I didn't care at all if the work was hard," she said.

===

Common sensibilities

Ouran High School Host Club was originally a popular manga series that has sold more than 13 million copies. The live-action drama was aired after the series was successfully adapted into an anime series. Kawaguchi was cast in the leading role of Haruhi, an ordinary girl who attends a prestigious high school whose students come from affluent families.

"The heroine is very much like my real self," she said. "When I go to an electronics store, I haggle until I get a good bargain. Once, I got a discount of about 30,000 yen." Kawaguchi added that every night, she always remembers to unplug electric appliances to save power.

In the drama, Haruhi regularly drinks instant coffee--a fact that earns her the ridicule of her classmates, who deride the drink as "coffee for ordinary people." "I often drink [instant] miso soup, coffee and soup. I think I have a lot of 'commoner' sensibilities, even in real life," she said.

Kawaguchi thoroughly studied the original manga series, and carefully listened to the way the voice actor for Haruhi spoke in the anime series. Before filming, she also prepared as hard as she could for her role.

"I could portray Haruhi in a way that only I could. It's an important film that could really be a starting point for my career," Kawaguchi said confidently.

Her favorite scene to shoot in the film was when she delivered a line expressing the importance of familial love: "Someday, I want to be a woman like my mother, who can keep a smile on people's faces."

Homemade dishes made with love play an important role in the story. Kawaguchi is actually very good at cooking, and often tries to make Japanese foods such as boiled pumpkin and oyakodon--boiled chicken and eggs on rice. She may have gotten her ability to cook and simultaneously tidy up from her parents.

Whenever she returns to Fukuejima, she always asks her grandmother to cook "delicious rolled eggs." She said she is happiest when eating udon noodles in a broth made with flying fish, which is a speciality of the Goto Islands. For Kawaguchi, cooking is a symbol of familial love not only in the film, but also in real life.  I wanted thing to fix the car.