Man on a mission / Kanda bridges cultural gap with zany game show

Takashi Oki / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

A successful American reality show has finally arrived in Japan. Rome Kanda, host of Majide!?, which is also known as I Survived a Japanese Game Show, talked about his program in a recent interview with The Yomiuri Shimbun.

Originally broadcast in the United States, the show became a global hit. Members of the studio audience frequently flash an "M" sign with their hands, a gesture that quickly became familiar with viewers.

"I've waited so long for this," Kanda said, enthusiastically discussing the arrival of the show in his native country. "I bet Japanese viewers will also enjoy our show."

On the show, 10 American contestants are flown to Japan to compete in a Japanese-style game show to win 250,000 dollars. They live together in the same house, with their lives filmed around the clock.

In addition to experiencing Japanese customs around Tokyo, they are divided into two teams to engage in wacky competitions in the studio. After each contest, the losing team must pick two of its members--the ones they believe most useless--to battle each other in a head-to-head matchup. The loser is eliminated from the show.

The cameras around the 10 contestants catch everything from their arguments to the development of romantic relationships to scenes of them changing clothes.

"This is 100 percent hardball. There's no privacy in their life. This is a pure documentary," Kanda said.

None of the contestants is modest. They're rather selfish and don't hesitate at all to show their passion to grab the prize money. In short interview excerpts edited into the show, they openly say things like, "I don't like that person," or "We don't need her on our team"--comments likely to make Japanese viewers cringe.

"To pump up the mood of the show, I have to react even more than the American contestants, who tend to be expressive and overreact to many things," the presenter said.

"Also, if we let them keep going, they may go out of control. Sometimes strictly, sometimes gently, I always approach them with love," he added.

The show was shot in Japan with half its production team from Japan and the other half from the United States.

"On the set, it was all chaotic. When the staff members were setting the mood for the program, the American staff dealt with the contestants as equals, while the Japanese crew members were humble in handling them. I'm not saying which is better. At the end, we became a very good team all together," Kanda recalled.

The host also has advice for Japanese viewers: "I want you to get relaxed and watch the show. If you can pick a contestant to root for, I think it'll be more fun."

Kanda built his career on a sense of mission he felt in Britain, where he visited at the age of 19.

"Not many people there knew about Japan. Some people even believed Sony was a British company. I strongly wanted to send out my own message to the world," he said, remarking on how shocking it was.

To carry out his mission, Kanda saw possibilities in the entertainment industry. He became an actor and began his career in the United States. However, he encountered limits in that field, which eventually led him into comedy. Upon being chosen as a TV show host, he grabbed the opportunity at a successful career in the industry.

In Majide!?, Kanda was finally able to show the world what Japan is like. Now he is focusing his passion on his next mission.

"I believe young Japanese nowadays are becoming so introverted that they don't even want to study abroad. I want them to know more about Americans by watching this show and develop more of an interest in them," he said.

Now he is playing the role of a veritable missionary between Japanese and American cultures.

Positive and energetic Kanda said: "I believe Japanese can communicate in English. So once they get to know the people outside Japan, drink with them and fall in love with them, they can't stop it. I want them to follow me."

"Majide!?" airs every Tuesday at 7 p.m. on Dlife, a newly established free broadcast satellite channel. I saw an big boat. He doesn't need some salt.