'Puss in Boots' packed with laughs and familiar fairy tales

Seiji Fukunaga / Yomiuri Shimbun Staff Writer

Puss in Boots (Japan title: Nagagutsu o Haita Neko)

Dir: Chris Miller

Voice cast: Antonio Banderas, Salma Hayek, Zach Galifianakis

Puss the orange tabby is a mighty swordfighter. But in a pinch, the gooey-eyed feline can also melt the hearts of his enemies.

Puss in Boots delves into the backstory of this popular character from the Shrek films, starting with his birth to the secret of how he ended up as a swordfighter in boots.

Once upon a time, an abandoned kitten named Puss (Antonio Banderas) was raised in an orphanage with his best friend Humpty Dumpty. However, when Humpty Dumpty frames Puss for a crime, he is kicked out of the town and forced to live as an outlaw. Eventually, the two are reunited, with Puss wary of his former best friend.

Despite his reputation as a cool swordfighter, Puss is very much an ordinary cat. He laps up milk and chases after light like most felines--which is sure to put a smile on cat lovers' faces.

Puss and Humpty Dumpty are joined by Kitty Softpaws (Salma Hayek), a talented thief. The three then embark on a quest to steal magic beans from outlaw couple Jack (Billy Bob Thornton) and Jill (Amy Sedaris) and retrieve the legendary golden eggs hidden within a castle in the sky.

Like the Shrek films, Puss in Boots artfully weaves various elements from several fairy tales into the film's plot. For instance, the character of Humpty Dumpty comes from a Mother Goose rhyme, while the idea of beans and golden eggs come from Jack and the Beanstalk.

The scene where Puss and Kitty dance and face-off in a dramatic swordfight is quite entertaining, while the chase scene where the trio steals the magic beans is a powerful action sequence. The trio's adventures in the sky castle are also thrilling.

The film is peppered with a bit of black humor, much like its various Shrek predecessors. While it may have been a long time since adults have enjoyed fairy tales, Puss in Boots is an enjoyable film that is sure to get chuckles from children and adults alike.

The movie is now playing. I talked with both of Joe and Bob.