Fukushima poems to be shared with world

The Yomiuri Shimbun

A university student from Fukushima Prefecture is leading the translation of a collection of poetry written by Fukushima residents into 12 languages to share their innermost feelings and refusal to be cowed by the nuclear crisis.

"I hope the translations will show people around the world that residents in Fukushima are trying to live just as they did before the crisis" at the Fukushima No. 1 nuclear power plant, said Chikako Kozawa, a fourth-year student at Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.

The group intends to complete the translation this summer.

The original book was published by Fukushima-based gas dealer Apollo Gas in November. The company had invited local residents to submit work on two themes--"It's time to encourage our hometown" and "The warmth of people's hearts"--from June to September. Contributors aged from 3 to 90 provided a total of 412 pieces, including haiku poems.

Kozawa, 21, was an acquaintance of Apollo Gas President Yuji Shinogi. While she was doing volunteer work in her hometown of Fukushima and other places in the prefecture in July, Shinogi asked her to translate the book. Kozawa willingly accepted his request, but it took some time until she started reading it.

"At first, I found it so difficult to open the book," she said.

When the disaster struck on March 11, 2011, Kozawa was a student in New York. She soon returned to Japan.

Her grandparents in Namie had been forced to evacuate because of the crisis at the Fukushima plant, and her mother and sister were extremely depressed. Kozawa felt guilty that she had not been there when her family was having a rough time. She worried that she might not be able to empathize with the content of the book even if she read it.

She finally cracked open the book at the end of last year after her emotions had settled down.

She could not help but smile when she read some of the lines.

"After the quake, looking at the call register on my mobile phone was like going to a school reunion."

"Text messages from my children reveal their personalities. One was simple, another is polite. Both were from my children."

One poem by a 4-year-old was especially moving. It read in part: "I love kindergarten. I love flowers. I love slides...I won't give in to radiation."

Kozawa felt relieved by the strength of people in Fukushima Prefecture who refused to buckle in the face of extreme difficulties. "I really wanted to convey their real feelings to people who only think of Fukushima as the place where the nuclear crisis happened," she said.

To get help with the translations, Kozawa turned to a website operated by university students that details the conditions in areas devastated by the quake in 26 languages. She soon found some volunteers willing to lend a hand.

Kozawa is in charge of translating the poems into Hindi.

"I hope my translation can convey my gratitude to people all over the world who have supported Japan" after the disaster, she said. I don't have a eraser. She doesn't like a train station dogs.