Researchers to study root of Spaniards named Japon

The Yomiuri Shimbun

A bronze statue of Hasekura Tsunenaga and a torii shrine gate are seen in a park in Coria del Rio in Spain.

A team of Japanese researchers will soon analyze the DNA of a group of Spaniards whose family name is Japon (Japan) to determine whether they are descendants of samurai dispatched to Europe about 400 years ago.

Roughly 800 Spaniards with this family name are living in Coria del Rio, a town in the suburbs of Seville, and surrounding areas in southern Spain. They are believed to be descendants of Japanese.

A Japanese delegation led by Hasekura Tsunenaga was sent to Europe on a trade mission by Sendai lord Date Masamune (1567-1636) and arrived in Spain in 1614. The delegation stayed in the town for a while, and dozens of years after it left the family name of Japon began to appear in ancient documents for the first time.

Experts on local history have raised the possibility that those bearing the Japon surname are descendants of the delegation members. The theory began to spread in Japan several years before the 1992 Seville Exposition and has also attracted the attention of Japanese people.

A joint research team including Nagoya University, the University of Tokyo and the National Institute of Genetics aims to conduct genomic analysis of the Japons living in Spain. The team plans to obtain their blood and other bodily samples with permission from the Japons and compare the data with the genetic information of Japanese.

A specialist said, "Thanks to recent progress in DNA technology, it's possible to make comparisons with genomes dating back 400 years."

The Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology Ministry has informally decided to provide a subsidy for scientific research for the project from this fiscal year.

The "Japon legend," which has stirred the imagination of history lovers, will soon be scientifically verified or disproved using advanced technology.

===

Town of Japon in Spain

Japons living in the town have promoted friendship among themselves by organizing the "Spain Japon Hasekura Tsunenaga Association."

A bronze statue of Hasekura, a torii shrine gate and signs in Japanese have been built at a park in Coria del Rio. Residents of the town are keenly aware of their connection to Japan.

Juan Francisco Japon, chairman of the association, said in many cases children with the family name Japon are born with blue spots called Mongolian marks, which also commonly appear on Japanese babies.

He said he would be glad if his ancestry was verified.

The Mongolian marks are not the only reason Japons believe they are descendants of samurai. An old court record archived in Seville tells of how Takino Kahyoe, one of the samurai in the delegation, remained in a town near Seville after the delegation left Spain.

There are many unknown aspects regarding the exact locations that Hasekura's delegation visited, how many of them left the delegation along the way and when they left. It is widely believed, however, that the delegation departed from Spain in 1617 from a port in Coria del Rio.

Local history experts have speculated that five or so samurai remained in the town without boarding the ship. The fact that a priest who had accompanied the delegation came from a famous family in Coria del Rio supports the speculation that the group stayed in the area.

Among the documents found in a local church was a birth record of a baby girl whose family name was registered as Japon. The town office also holds a record indicating a man with the family name Japon was drafted.  I saw an big boat.